🪆 Introduction to Matryoshka Embedding Models (#1849)
huggingface/blog: matryoshka.md

        "search_document: Amelia Mary Earhart was an American aviation pioneer and writer.",
    ],
    convert_to_tensor=True,
)
# The Nomic team uses a custom architecture, making them recommend Layer Normalization before truncation
embeddings = F.layer_norm(embeddings, normalized_shape=(embeddings.shape[1],))
embeddings[..., :matryoshka_dim]  # Shrink the embedding dimensions

similarities = cos_sim(embeddings[0], embeddings[1:])
# => tensor([[0.7154, 0.4468]])
```

* Link to the model: [nomic-ai/nomic-embed-text-v1.5](https://huggingface.co/nomic-ai/nomic-embed-text-v1.5)

</details>

## Results

## Demo

In this demo, you can dynamically shrink the output dimensions of the [`nomic-ai/nomic-embed-text-v1.5`](https://huggingface.co/nomic-ai/nomic-embed-text-v1.5) Matryoshka embedding model and observe how it affects the retrieval performance. All of the embeddings are computed in the browser using [🤗 Transformers.js](https://github.com/xenova/transformers.js).

<script type="module" src="https://gradio.s3-us-west-2.amazonaws.com/3.32.0/gradio.js"></script>

> <gradio-app theme_mode="light" space="Xenova/adaptive-retrieval-web"></gradio-app>

Author: Oh, perfect!

![embedding similarity](assets/matryoshka/embedding_similarity.png)

This has an enormous amount of use cases, and serves as the backbone for recommendation systems, retrieval, one-shot or few-shot learning, outlier detection, similarity search, paraphrase detection, clustering, classification, and much more!

## 🪆 Matryoshka Embeddings
As research progressed, new state-of-the-art (text) embedding models started producing embeddings with increasingly high output dimensions, i.e. every input text is represented using more values. Although this results in great performance, it does come at a cost of efficiency of downstream tasks such as search or classification.

As a result, [Kusupati et al.](https://arxiv.org/abs/2205.13147) were inspired to create embedding models whose embeddings could reasonably be shrunk without suffering too much on performance.

![matryoshka model](assets/matryoshka/matryoshka_model.png)

These Matryoshka embedding models are trained such that these small truncated embeddings are still useful. In short, Matryoshka embedding models can produce useful embeddings of various dimensions.

> 

Author: I like the direction, although I would name the section `🪆 Matryoshka Dolls` instead. I'm interested in what you've got planned for the image, too 😄

> 

Reviewer: Sure thing (edited)

As for the image, I was thinking about possibly creating an animation trying to form an analogy between "discarding smaller dolls" and "truncating the embeddings" while "maintaining most of the information"

For Matryoshka Embedding models, a training step also involves producing embeddings for your training batch, but then you use some loss function to determine not just the quality of your full-size embeddings, but the quality of your embeddings at various different dimensionalities. For example, at output dimensionalities of 768, 512, 256, 128 and 64. The loss values for each dimensionality are added together, resulting in a final loss value. The optimizer will then try and adjust the model weights to lower this loss value.

In practice, this creates an incentive for the model to frontload the most important information in the start of an embedding, such that it will be retained if the embedding is shrunk. 

### In Sentence Transformers
[Sentence Tranformers](https://sbert.net) is a commonly used framework to train embedding models, and it recently implemented support for Matryoshka models. Training a Matryoshka embedding model using Sentence Transformers is quite elementary: rather than applying some loss function on only the full-size embeddings, we also apply that same loss function on truncated portions of the embeddings.

> For example, if a model has an embedding dimension of 768 by default, it can now be trained on 768, 512, 256, 128 and 64. Each of these losses will be added together, optionally with some weight:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
For example, if a model has an original embedding dimension of 768, it can now be trained on 768, 512, 256, 128 and 64. Each of these losses will be added together, optionally with some weight:
```

```python
from sentence_transformers import SentenceTransformer
from sentence_transformers.losses import CoSENTLoss, MatryoshkaLoss

model = SentenceTransformer("microsoft/mpnet-base")

base_loss = CoSENTLoss(model=model)
loss = MatryoshkaLoss(
    model=model,
    loss=base_loss,
    matryoshka_dims=[768, 512, 256, 128, 64],
    matryoshka_weight=[1, 1, 1, 1, 1],
)

model.fit(
    train_objectives=[(train_dataset, loss)],

>     ...,

Reviewer: I would recommend either (1) defining the list of additional parameters, or (2) linking to where the rest are. Many readers will copy-paste, and without a working snippet, it may annoy them.

Author: The reason that this isn't a full, complete snippet is because data preprocessing is a pain for Sentence Transformers right now. It's one of the things I'd like to change in v3 (then you can just pass a `Dataset` instance to a `Trainer`).

Right now I do 2: The "References" list below the snippet has the signature/documentation for the `fit` method. All other parameters are "optional, but recommended", so I could also do `model.fit(train_objectives=[(train_dataset, loss)])`, but I don't want to recommend that behaviour.

I also link to complete, ready-to-run scripts below this snippet.

* **[matryoshka_nli_reduced_dim.py](https://github.com/UKPLab/sentence-transformers/blob/master/examples/training/matryoshka/matryoshka_nli_reduced_dim.py)**: This example uses the MultipleNegativesRankingLoss with MatryoshkaLoss to train a strong embedding model with a small maximum output dimension of 256. It trains using Natural Language Inference (NLI) data, and is an adaptation of the [NLI](../nli/README) documentation.
* **[matryoshka_sts.py](https://github.com/UKPLab/sentence-transformers/blob/master/examples/training/matryoshka/matryoshka_sts.py)**: This example uses the CoSENTLoss with MatryoshkaLoss to train an embedding model on the training set of the STSBenchmark dataset. It is an adaptation of the [STS](../sts/README) documentation.

## How do I use 🪆 Matryoshka Embedding models?
### Theoretically
In practice, getting embeddings from a Matryoshka embedding model works the same way as with a normal embedding model. The only difference is that after receiving the embeddings, we can optionally truncate them to a smaller dimensionality. Do note that if the embeddings were normalized, then after truncating they will no longer be, so you may want to re-normalize.

> Keep in mind that although processing smaller embeddings for downstream tasks (retrieval, clustering, etc.) will be faster, getting the smaller embeddings from the model is just as fast as getting the larger ones.

Reviewer: It might be useful to mention (again) that you can choose to **store** the truncated versions.

Author: I tackled this in 96a5c062c21e56dde44ea8491afea0ea64ad2f26, feel free to review my wording here :)

Let's try to use a model that I trained using [`matryoshka_nli.py`](https://github.com/UKPLab/sentence-transformers/blob/master/examples/training/matryoshka/matryoshka_nli.py) with [`microsoft/mpnet-base`](https://huggingface.co/microsoft/mpnet-base):
```python
from sentence_transformers import SentenceTransformer
from sentence_transformers.util import cos_sim

model = SentenceTransformer("tomaarsen/mpnet-base-nli-matryoshka")

matryoshka_dim = 64
embeddings = model.encode(
    [
        "The weather is so nice!",
        "It's so sunny outside!",
        "He drove to the stadium.",
    ]
)
embeddings[..., :matryoshka_dim]  # Shrink the embedding dimensions

# Similarity of the first sentence to the other two:
similarities = cos_sim(embeddings[0], embeddings[1:])
print(similarities)
# => tensor([[0.8428, 0.0873]])
```
* Link to the model: [tomaarsen/mpnet-base-nli-matryoshka](https://huggingface.co/tomaarsen/mpnet-base-nli-matryoshka)

> Feel free to experiment with  using different values for `matryoshka_dim` and observing how that affects the similarities.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Feel free to experiment with using different values for `matryoshka_dim` and observing how that affects the similarities.
```

TODO: link to adaptive retrieval demo.

---
title: "🪆 Introduction to Matryoshka Embedding Models"

> thumbnail: /blog/assets/matryoshka/thumbnail.png

Author: Resolved in 80cb46be7063bf9d9fb98e0c2087e5ef2cf529f0

authors:
- user: tomaarsen
- user: xenova
---

> # 🪆 Introduction to Matryoshka Embedding Models

Reviewer 2: I think we should have a 3-4 sentence description of the blog post + a ToC before the main content

Author: Resolved in fbfae0b3336ca18ece4fa24fdf13a1dc7d12eef8 and cbbd67f8deba49786403f4acb0f2167ceedd5fc3, respectively.

## Understanding Embeddings
Embeddings are one of the most versatile tools in natural language processing, enabling practitioners to solve a large variety of tasks. In essence, an embedding is a numerical representation of a more complex object, like text, images, audio, etc. 

![embedding model](assets/matryoshka/embedding_model.png)

You can compute the similarity of the complex object by computing the similarity of the embeddings!

![embedding similarity](assets/matryoshka/embedding_similarity.png)

This has an enormous amount of use cases, and serves as the backbone for recommendation systems, retrieval, one-shot or few-shot learning, outlier detection, similarity search, paraphrase detection, clustering, classification, and much more!

## 🪆 Matryoshka Embeddings

> As research progressed, new state-of-the-art (text) embedding models started producing embeddings with increasingly higher output dimensions, i.e., every input text is represented using more values. Although this improves performance, it comes at the cost of efficiency of downstream tasks such as search or classification.

Author: Resolved in 80cb46be7063bf9d9fb98e0c2087e5ef2cf529f0

Consequently, [Kusupati et al.](https://arxiv.org/abs/2205.13147) (2022) were inspired to create embedding models whose embeddings could reasonably be shrunk without suffering too much on performance.

![matryoshka model](assets/matryoshka/matryoshka_model.png)

These Matryoshka embedding models are trained such that these small truncated embeddings are still useful. In short, Matryoshka embedding models can produce useful embeddings of various dimensions.

## Why would you use 🪆 Matryoshka Embedding models?
Such variable-size embedding models can be quite valuable to practitioners, for example:
1. **Shortlisting and reranking**: Rather than performing your downstream task (e.g., nearest neighbor search) on the full embeddings, you can shrink the embeddings to a smaller size and very efficiently "shortlist" your embeddings. Afterwards, you can process the remaining embeddings using their full dimensionality.

> 2. **Trade-offs**: Matryoshka models will allow you to scale your embedding solutions to your desired storage cost, processing speed and performance. 

Author: Resolved in 7857297aa23602f640da682b92f4fb4de4553ee3

* **[matryoshka_nli_reduced_dim.py](https://github.com/UKPLab/sentence-transformers/blob/master/examples/training/matryoshka/matryoshka_nli_reduced_dim.py)**: This example uses the MultipleNegativesRankingLoss with MatryoshkaLoss to train a strong embedding model with a small maximum output dimension of 256. It trains using Natural Language Inference (NLI) data, and is an adaptation of the [NLI](../nli/README) documentation.
* **[matryoshka_sts.py](https://github.com/UKPLab/sentence-transformers/blob/master/examples/training/matryoshka/matryoshka_sts.py)**: This example uses the CoSENTLoss with MatryoshkaLoss to train an embedding model on the training set of the STSBenchmark dataset. It is an adaptation of the [STS](../sts/README) documentation.

## How do I use 🪆 Matryoshka Embedding models?
### Theoretically
In practice, getting embeddings from a Matryoshka embedding model works the same way as with a normal embedding model. The only difference is that after receiving the embeddings, we can optionally truncate them to a smaller dimensionality. Do note that if the embeddings were normalized, then after truncating they will no longer be, so you may want to re-normalize.

> After truncating, you can either directly apply them for your use cases, or store them such that they can be used later. After all, smaller embeddings in your vector database should result in considerably smaller latencies!

Reviewer: ```suggestion
After truncating, you can either directly apply them for your use cases, or store them such that they can be used later. After all, smaller embeddings in your vector database should result in considerably faster search!
```
or "considerably lower latencies"

Author: I decided to go with "considerable speedups"

> ---

Reviewer 2: You should remove the old thumbnail from the PR?

Author: Resolved in f1acfd6d5443834eea965bb9253b637cd80456f5

Let's try to use a model that I trained using [`matryoshka_nli.py`](https://github.com/UKPLab/sentence-transformers/blob/master/examples/training/matryoshka/matryoshka_nli.py) with [`microsoft/mpnet-base`](https://huggingface.co/microsoft/mpnet-base):

```python
from sentence_transformers import SentenceTransformer
from sentence_transformers.util import cos_sim

model = SentenceTransformer("tomaarsen/mpnet-base-nli-matryoshka")

matryoshka_dim = 64
embeddings = model.encode(
    [
        "The weather is so nice!",
        "It's so sunny outside!",
        "He drove to the stadium.",
    ]
)
embeddings = embeddings[..., :matryoshka_dim]  # Shrink the embedding dimensions
print(embeddings.shape)
# => (3, 64)

# Similarity of the first sentence to the other two:
similarities = cos_sim(embeddings[0], embeddings[1:])
print(similarities)
# => tensor([[0.8910, 0.1337]])
```

* Link to the model: [tomaarsen/mpnet-base-nli-matryoshka](https://huggingface.co/tomaarsen/mpnet-base-nli-matryoshka)

> Feel free to experiment with using different values for `matryoshka_dim` and observing how that affects the similarities. You can do so either by running this code locally, on the cloud such as with [Google Colab](https://colab.research.google.com/drive/1YlU_T4GaHWVd-PFJFPsTxB6fNNydx0Gx?usp=sharing), or by checking out the [demo](#demo).

Reviewer 2: I would host the notebook on a Hub repo or in GitHub, drive has caused issues in the past (the Hub will automatically how a `Open in Colab` button)

Author: Resolved in 3a6e060d098d9e041480439524cc12c4154ae2e9
